
# How to Make the Most of Your Computer Science Major

## Prof. Norm Matloff, University of California, Davis CS Dept.

![alt text](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/matloff/prVis/master/data/SwissRoll/SWwithY.png)

Computer Science is a fascinating, ever-growing field.  It's an exciting
time to be in CS -- but how to make the most of this opportunity?

We'll cover a variety topics, so let's get started?

## My background

My PhD is in pure math, and my research areas are machine learning,
parallel computation and statistics.  I've won some teaching awards, and
my book, *Statistical Regression and Classification: from Linear Models
to Machine Learning* was the 2017 recipient of the Ziegal Award.

I was in industry long, long ago, but have always kept close ties to the
real world.  I frequently interact with people in Silicon Valley, and
keep close tabs on the job market. Syndicated columnist Joyce Lain
Kennedy features my advice on career issues in her
books, *Resumes for Dummies*, *Job Hunting for Dummies* and *Cover Letters
for Dummies*. 

Of course, the material here represents my own views only, and does not
imply endorsement by my university or department.

## What do CS graduates do?

* Yes, many become software engineers.  But there is lots more.

* Data scientists:  Analyzing, graphing and predicting data.

* Database analysts:  A big bank would quickly go out of business if its
  software and hardware couldn't up with the huge daily olume of checks,
credit card transaction and so on.

* Computer security specialists:  How to foil the Bad Guys?

## Hardware vs. software

* Very few CS grads actually design hardware.  HOWEVER, knowledge of
  high-level hardware (*computer architecture*) and low-level software (
operating systems, OS) is extremely important.

* Illustrative story:  Once the daughter of family friends of ours
received a scholarship to study the Chinese language in China. She
returned home with lots of pictures on her laptop.  Unfortunately, her
little sister dropped the machine, and it would not reboot.  The
pictures were lost!  But with my knowledge of OS, disk drives and so on,
I was able to recover most of the pics.

* Large software applications, e.g. the bank database example above,
generally place a premium on speed.  This in turn requires a firm
understanding of high level hardware and low-level software.

* Computer security requires a keen knowledge of OS, especially network
  operation.  For a great read and a glimpse into how hackers exploit
holes in the OS, read *The Cuckoo's Nest*, by Cliff Stoll.  There's also
a bit at the very beginning of the film *A Social Network*, the story of
the founding of Facebook.

If you are required to take a course in assembly language, do NOT treat
this as "just another language."  *It is your window into 
computer systems*, a way to learn abouy computer architecture and OS..

## Windows vs. Mac vs. Linux

Windows is a great OS for non-CS people, but most computer scientists --
and most employers of computer scientists -- use some form of Unix,
either a Mac or Linux.

Using your Unix system for *all of your daily computer work* -- not just
coding, but also e-mail, essay writing, Website building and so on.

If you want to retain Windows for video games or whatever, that's fine --
set up your system to dual-boot the two systems.  In fact, the setting
up of this will itself be a valuable learning experience.

Don't use the Linux subsystem in Windows.  It lacks many capabilities.

## Coursework is not enough

As noted, use a Unix system for ALL your daily work.  This daily usage
is the ONLY way to learn Unix; coursework is not enough.  

Write little **bash** shell scripts to help you with your daily work,
automating tasks.

Write larger programs for your own personal use.  Make sure it's
something you WILL use, for motivation.

## Make real USE of what you learn

In writing your own code, make sure to use a debugging tool.  You may
have learned to do this in your intro programming course, but then just
forgotten it after the course ended.  *Big mistake!*  The reason your
course taught you how to use the debugger is to BENEFIT YOU!  Once you
get good at the debugger, it will really shorten the time you need to
find and fix your code bugs.  Do you really want to pull an all-nighter
to fix your bugs?  No?  Then use a debugging tool.

Story:  Once there were two students talking to the instructor across
the hall from my office.  I heard one say to the other, "Did you hear
about Mary?  She finished the programming assignment quickly, added some
comments, and turned it in after 45 minutes!"  What's wrong with this
picture?  Mary added the comments to her code only because she knew
she'd be docked points without them.  Totally wrongheaded!  Again, the
purpose of the comments is to BENEFIT YOU!  

Write some comments even before you start coding; it will really
organize help your thoughts.  Similarly, write comments before each
function, to say what it is doing, what it's arguments are, etc. Again,
write these BEFORE you code the function itself.  Then within the
function, if a group of, say, 3-4 lines perform some mini-task, precede
them with a comment, saying something like "In the next 3 lines, we
determine which array elements caused the total to exceed its limit."

## Choosing your professors

The temptation, of course, is to take the path of least resistance,
selecting professors on the basis of their reputation for easiness.
Fight this temptation, and choose instructors who will really help you
grow intellectually, the type who:

* Give challenging, thought provoking assignnments and exams.  If their
  assignments "give away the keys to the kingdom," giving too many hints
on how to do the work, you are not going to learn.  Similarly, if before
each exam they give you a "practice test" that turns out to be close to
the real thing, your studying for the exam won't give you the proper
overview of the subject matter.

* Do prominent research in their field, *and* are excited about sharing
  their insights with their students.

Related:  Read the textbook!  Read it for understanding, not like
reading a novel.  Pause often for thought.  Your reading will likely
cause you to have lots of questions.  Think hard in trying to answer
them yourself, and ask your professor or TAs about the rest.

## Get a summer internship

It generally is not easy to get these, but they are highly worth the
effort.  They get you out of the student mental ruts like "Can I get
partial credit?" and "Will this be on the final exam?"  If you're
writing code, make sure it is valuable to the employer:  Make double
sure that it WORKS, including on edge cases, and that the code is clear
(see the points above about comments).

## Learn probability and statistics

The Accreditation Board for Engineering Technology, which accredits
engineering-oriented curricula at most major universities, requires that
students get background in both probability and statistics.  These
fields, especially in the form of machine learning and data science, are
key elements of any computer scientist's intellectual toolkit.  And
beyond your profession, these fields should be integral parts of any
educated person's analytical abilities.

Note that I didn't phrase the above section title as "Take probability
and statistics classes."  Yes, take the courses, but make sure you
really understand what's going on.  Don't just plug into formulas.

And, QUESTION the material.  If your stat instructor teaches you some
procedure requiring a normal (Gaussian) distribution but doesn't discuss
the implications, then he/she is failing in their responsibility to
educate you.  The same is true if they teach you *p-values* without
explaining their dangers.  (In a famous 2016 position statement, the
American Statistical Association discouraged the use of p-values.)

## Develop your speaking and writing skills

Craig Barrett, former CEO of Intel, once famously remarked, "The
half-life of an engineer is only a few years."  In other words, if say
you begin your career as a software engineer, you will likely find that
after 5-10 years, you are asked to transition into management or some
other "talking job."  If you've ever visited a company that produces
software, you probably noticed that most of the coders are in their 20s
or early 30s; this is no coincidence.

And though, yes, coursework helps to some extent, *you can only grow by
working on these things yourself*.  When you are writing something, ask
yourself what you can do to make your thoughts clearer.  And if you have
a fear of speaking out in the group, overcome it!
